---
title: "Gene therapy for sickle cell disease: recent advances, clinical trials and future directions."
source: pubmed
keyword: "gene therapy"
pmid: "39729054"
pmc_id: "PMC12198424"
year: 2025
authors: ["Josiah Ballantine", "John F Tisdale"]
doi: "10.1016/j.jcyt.2024.11.006"
journal: "Cytotherapy"
journal_short: "Cytotherapy"
tags: [gene-therapy]
mesh_terms: ["Humans", "Anemia, Sickle Cell", "Genetic Therapy", "Gene Editing", "Clinical Trials as Topic", "Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation", "CRISPR-Cas Systems", "Genetic Vectors", "Animals", "beta-Thalassemia"]
has_fulltext: true
content_layer: L1
fetched: "2026-04-20"
---

## Abstract

Sickle cell disease (SCD) is the most common inherited blood disorder worldwide, impacting millions and imposing severe healthcare challenges, particularly in resource-limited regions. Current treatments have variable efficacy and require lifelong adherence. Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation can be curative but comes with significant side effects and limited donor availability limits its widespread applicability. Gene therapy, by addressing the root genetic causes, offers a revolutionary alternative. This article discusses the molecular mechanisms of SCD and β-thalassemia and highlights advancements in gene therapy, such as gene addition via lentiviral vectors and gene editing with CRISPR/Cas9 technology. Clinical trials have brought about significant progress but challenges remain, including leukemogenesis, delivery efficiency and cost. Future efforts must focus on enhancing efficiency, reducing costs, developing nongenotoxic conditioning regimens and methods for in vivo application.

## Full Text

### Introduction:

Sickle cell disease (SCD) was the first genetic disorder to be characterized by its exact molecular mutation, identified by Vernon Ingram in 1956 as a single point mutation at position 6 of the β-globin gene. This mutation causes the substitution of valine for glutamic acid, leading to the production of abnormal hemoglobin S (HbS).[1, 2] Despite this early breakthrough, it has taken decades to develop an established cure. Affecting millions worldwide, SCD places a particularly heavy burden on regions with limited healthcare infrastructure, where even access to basic medical care is often lacking. The mutation causes red blood cells to sickle under low oxygen conditions, impeding blood flow to any organ and resulting in vaso-occlusive episodes. These episodes are the hallmark of the disease and cause excruciating pain throughout the body, leading to frequent hospitalizations and long-term organ damage.

SCD is a disease of profound suffering, both in its physical manifestations and its global impact. For millions of individuals, particularly those in sub-Saharan Africa, this suffering is compounded by poverty and limited access to healthcare, making the pain both unbearable and unnoticed in much of the world.

Efforts to improve healthcare infrastructure, including newborn screening, antibiotic prophylaxis, and immunization have significantly reduced childhood mortality in regions with accessible healthcare. Nonetheless, early mortality remains a global issue, with the average life expectancy of those with SCD in the United States being more than 20 years shorter compared to non-SCD population.[3]

Symptom management can be achieved in many patients through FDA-approved medications such as hydroxyurea, L-glutamine, and crizanlizumab. However, these treatments offer variable efficacy, come with side effects, and require lifelong adherence. Thus, the time has come to focus our efforts on developing curative treatment strategies that are not only effective but accessible to all, regardless of geographic or economic barriers.

The first patient to be cured of SCD was reported in 1984, when a patient undergoing allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT) for acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The transplant not only cured the leukemia but also resulted in a cure for SCD.[4] Now, 40 years later, allogeneic BMT has become an accepted curative treatment option for SCD but it is generally reserved for patients with severe disease due to the associated risks. The best outcomes for sickle cell disease (SCD) patients are seen in those with fully matched sibling donors, but such donors are unavailable for most patients.[5, 6] Research is ongoing into the use of alternative donors, such as haploidentical donors or cord blood. While graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and graft failure are risks with all BMTs, these complications are more frequent with regimens using alternative donor sources.[7]

Therefore, gene therapy has emerged as an attractive alternative, offering curative potential for any patient, as it allows individuals to serve as their own donors. Although this review focuses on SCD, a qualitative hemoglobinopathy, many gene therapy approaches are also theoretically viable for β-thalassemia, its sister disease, which is a quantitative hemoglobinopathy. In fact, the first successful gene therapy for a hemoglobinopathy was in 2005, when a patient with β-thalassemia was treated with an early-generation lentiviral vector (HPV459) developed by bluebird bio.[8] The next-generation vector, BB305, has since been approved for use in patients with both SCD (2023) and β-thalassemia (2022) in the United States.

### Globin Switching: A Key Mechanism for Unlocking Gene Therapy for Hemoglobinopathies

A key concept in understanding gene therapy for β-hemoglobinopathies is globin switching and the mechanism that underlies it. The β-globin gene is located within a cluster of other β-like genes on chromosome 11 (HBE, HBG2, HBG1, HBD, and HBB), and arranged in order of their developmental expression (Figure 1). Each gene predominates at different stages of human development. During the embryonic stage, the yolk sac primarily produces embryonic hemoglobin (HBE). Around the second month of development, transcription shifts to the gamma-globin genes (HBG1 and HBG2). The transition to adult β-globin (HBB) begins around birth but is not fully completed until 6–9 months of age. This explains why patients with sickle cell disease (SCD), who have normal HBE, HBG, and HBD genes, usually experience no symptoms until this age. In fact, patients with SCD who also have hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin (HPFH) often exhibit a milder phenotype due to continued production of fetal hemoglobin, which has anti-sickling properties. [9]

The correlation between higher HbF levels and a milder SCD phenotype has spurred research into the mechanisms that regulate globin switching. HPFH is associated with deletions or point mutations within the HBB gene cluster. Deletional mutations typically involve parts of the beta-globin gene, while point mutations affect the promoters of HBG1 and HBG2. These point mutations can be in cis or in trans relative to the HbS gene, but when found in cis, they are linked due to their proximity on chromosome 11.[10] Nonetheless, HPFH mutations alone do not fully explain the variability in HbF levels among patients. Thus, HbF levels, similar to height, was found to be a polygenic trait influenced by several quantitative trait loci (QTLs).

Two major discoveries have advanced the field of gene therapy for β-hemoglobinopathies. First, globin switching is mediated by direct physical interactions between the promoters of individual globin genes and the β-Locus Control Region (βLCR), regulated by various transcription factors. Although the full complexity of this process remains unclear, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) led to a second breakthrough. Researchers discovered that most of the variability in HbF levels is due to polymorphisms at just three QTLs BCL11A, HBS1L-MYB, and the β-globin locus itself. [11, 12] Specifically, BCL11A has come to prominence not just because it is a potent repressor of fetal hemoglobin, but it is unique in that it possesses an erythroid-specific enhancer in intron 2 of the gene, located at DNase I hypersensitive sites (+62, +58, and +55 kb from the transcription start site), which is active only in red blood cells[13], thus making an ideal target for therapeutic genome editing offering a promising possibility of reactivating fetal hemoglobin production without affecting the other essential functions of BCL11A in non-erythroid tissues. [13]

### Gene therapy strategies

Since individuals with sickle cell trait express approximately over 50% hemoglobin A (HgbA), one might assume that that achieving around 50% expression of therapeutic globin would be necessary for a cure using bone marrow transplants or gene therapy. However, one must consider not only the percentage, but also the distribution. Transfusing a patient with SCD to a HbA% of 50% is not sufficient as the remaining 50% contain 100% HbS and thus are still prone to sickling. One must instead reach a threshold of red blood cells with a hemoglobin content sufficient to restore a normal lifespan. Mathematical models, and clinical experience demonstrate that when accounting for the vast differences in lifespan between sickle cells and healthy RBCs, a level of only about 20% is sufficient to reverse the sickle phenotype. In patients with thalassemia, where sickling is not a factor, a lower level of around 13% is needed to correct ineffective erythropoiesis and reverse the symptoms of anemia.[14]

There are two main conceptual approaches for gene therapy in sickle cell disease (SCD): gene insertion, where a therapeutic globin gene is introduced. In this approach, patients continue to express native HbS, but the anti-sickling hemoglobin is also expressed, creating a scenario similar to sickle cell trait. The second approach is gene editing, where a repressor of HbF is disrupted or the disease causing mutation is directly corrected.

### 1. Gene Insertion

Most research has focused on using lentiviral vectors to introduce a new therapeutic globin gene into hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). This approach allows patients to continue expressing native HbS but it gets competed out by the synthesis of new anti-sicking hemoglobin, thus mimicking a sickle cell trait phenotype. Lentiviral vectors have now become the preferred approach due to their ability to transduce quiescent cells and provide long-term, stable expression of the inserted gene. However, the development of this method required overcoming several major hurdles:

### Safety:

Safety has been a primary concern, particularly the risk of leukemogenesis. The earliest efforts toward gene therapy using gammaretroviral vectors in patients with ADA-SCID demonstrated that these vectors tended to integrate near transcriptionally active regions, such as promoters, which increased the risk of oncogene activation.[15, 16] Lentiviral vectors, however, have been shown to preferentially integrate into active gene regions, leading to a lower theoretical risk of leukemogenesis.[17] Current vectors are further improved by utilizing self-inactivating long-terminal repeats (SINLTR) in which the viral promoter in the LTR gets deactivated upon integration, thereby limiting the unintended activation of nearby genes. While lentiviral vectors have a strong clinical safety profile, there remains a theoretical risk of long-term genotoxic effects. Additionally, high-dose genotoxic chemotherapy, required for conditioning, carries risks for secondary malignancies.[18] Patients with SCD are at particularly high risk for secondary malignancies following chemotherapy even in the allogeneic HSCT setting thought due to several factors. The chronic inflammation, stress erythropoiesis, and bone marrow hypoxia associated with SCD have been suggested in predisposing the bone marrow to genomic instability, which can lead to higher rates of clonal hematopoiesis in this population, and the accumulation of somatic mutations, such as those in TP53.[19, 20] Furthermore, pre-existing mutations in SCD patients can expand under the stress of genotoxic conditioning regimens, such as high-dose busulfan, increasing the likelihood of myeloid malignancies like MDS and AML.[21]

### Erythroid-specific overexpression

The utilization of SINLTR, while necessary for optimal safety of these vectors, necessitates the use of an internal promoter to drive expression. Choice of promoter can include a ubiquitous promoter or a lineage specific promoter. Ubiquitous promoters such as CMV or PGK which results in transgene expression in all cell types. Expression of hemoglobin in non-RBC lineages, however, can be toxic to cells and thus a lineage specific promoter is required in which hemoglobin is only expressed in RBCs.

For some recessive diseases, only a small amount of gene expression is needed to provide curative benefit, normal red blood cells express hemoglobin at an extremely high concentration (32–36 g/dL) and since hemoglobin and must only be expressed in red blood cells. Thus, in the case of hemoglobinopathies, high-level expression is needed and in an erythroid-specific fashion. There are two main components of globin vectors that have been essential for developing such high-level erythroid specific expression.

### a) β-LCR

The discovery of the β-locus control region (β-LCR) as being organized into four distinct DNase I hypersensitive sites (HS1–4) located upstream of the globin gene cluster in 1984 provided the first potential means of developing high enough levels of beta globin expression since these elements could potentially be used as an internal enhancer along with the β-globin promoter to promote transgene expression in an erythroid specific manner.[22–24] The HS sites span approximately 90 kb of DNA, presenting an initial challenge of identifying the most essential regions to enhance erythroid-specific expression while limiting the overall size to fit within lentiviral vectors (~8–10 kb). Core regulatory elements within the HS regions were found to produce high levels of erythroid-specific expression, but excessive reduction of these elements led to significant position effect variegation (PEV), where significant clone-to-clone variation in β-globin expression was present based on the integration site.[25] Therefore, it is important to strike a balance between developing vectors that are short enough to achieve high viral titers, but large enough to support position-independent expression.

### b) Inclusion of intron 2 and 3’UTR by reverse oriented vectors

The β-globin gene possesses important enhancer elements within intron 2 and its 3’ untranslated region (UTR). Inclusion of these elements have been shown to be essential for obtaining adequate globin expression. Inclusion of intron 2 however, posed a challenge because splicing can occur during viral packaging. It was also shown that inclusion of the B-globin intron 2 contains an essential enhancer element and thus inclusion of intron 2 is required for B-globin expression. Given that splicing out of intron 2 occurs during viral packaging, inclusion of intron 2 necessitates an antisense orientation of the gene within the viral vector.[26]

### Lentiviral Vectors used in clinical trials for Sickle Cell Disease & β-Thalassemia

At this point, many different lentiviral vectors have been used in clinical trials for hemoglobinopathies, each of which only have slight variation. This first variable in designing lentiviral vectors is to consider choice of transgene. As discussed in two primary candidates for therapeutic globin chains are variants of beta (β)-globin and gamma (γ)-globin. In sickle cell disease (SCD), under deoxygenated conditions, a conformational change exposes the uncharged valine residue at position 6 of the β-globin chain, promoting polymerization of HbS into long fibers, which are responsible for the formation of sickle-shaped cells. Introducing wild-type β-globin can restore a “sickle cell trait”-like state, in which both HbS and HbA are expressed. However, researchers have identified several hemoglobin variants that are more effective at preventing sickling than HbA.

Gamma globin (γ-globin) has demonstrated strong anti-sickling effects. For one, it possesses higher oxygen affinity which may help in preventing the development of the conformational change that occurs upon hemoglobin deoxygenation. Additionally, the glutamine at position 87 of the γ-globin chain blocks lateral contact with the valine at position 6 in HbS. Utilizing the structural homology between γ- and β-globin, Pawliuk et al. demonstrated that the threonine (T) at position 87 of β-globin can be substituted with glutamine (Q), resulting in the T87Q β-globin variant, which exhibits anti-sickling effects similar to those of HbF.[24] Additionally, Townes et al. identified that the E22A substitution in β-globin disrupts axial contacts with the valine 6 residue of HbS, and the G16D mutation, derived from the naturally occurring non-pathogenic β-globin variant “hemoglobin J-Baltimore”, enhances the affinity of β-globin for α-globin chains. These three mutations—T87Q, E22A, and G16D—were incorporated into the βAS3 globin variant to enhance anti-sickling properties.[59] Furthermore, the G16D mutation can also be introduced into the γ-globin chain to further strengthen the anti-sickling effects of HbF.[42] Thus, the therapeutic transgenes that have been used for clinical trials are HbA wild type (GLOBE, Vebeglogene autotemcel, NCT03276455, NCT03351829), HbAT87Q (HPV569, BB305, TNS9.3.55, Lenti/G-βAS3-FB, LentiHBBT87Q, BD211, ALS20, KL003, BAH243), HbAS3 (GLOBE-1, ALS20) and HbGG16D (ARU-1801, CAL-H) as shown in Figure 2.

One additional strategy is being explored by Williams et al, which does not use any globin transgene at all, and instead utilizes shRNA in order to achieve Post-Transcriptional Genetic Silencing of BCL11A. (BCH-BB694) This method results in robust and stable HbF induction to levels of about 20–40%.[44]

### Insulators

Most clinical vectors carry a minimal Beta globin promoter along with HS2, HS3, and HS4 core elements from the LCR. These enhancer elements have a theoretical risk of being able to activate genes nearby to insertion point thereby contributing to oncogenesis risk. Several insulators inserted in the viral long terminal repeats (LTRs) that possess enhancer blocking activity have been tried in an effort to improve safety of these vectors by protecting neighboring genes from the LCR’s potent enhancer activity. The first vector used in clinical trials was HPV569, which utilized two copies of the core of the chicken b-globin HS4 (cHS4). Inclusion of the cHS4 insulator, however, resulted in low titers, poor transduction efficiency, and vector re-arrangements, with the loss of insulator elements. Early trial results demonstrated the occurance of partial clonal dominance upon vector integration in one patient within the high mobility group AT hook 2 (HMGA2) gene. It was discovered that the cHS4 chromatin insulator within the 5’ LTR introduced a cryptic splice acceptor site resulting in abnormal splicing, premature transcript termination, and truncated mRNA which was insensitive to degradation and led to transcriptional and post-transcriptional activation of the HMGA2 gene which was felt to be the cause of this patient’s transient clonal dominance.[60] Although the cHS4 insulator has been removed from the later generation vectors, the human A1 insulator has been incorporated in the TNS9.3.55 vector without adversely affecting vector production or vector titers.[61] Similarly, short insulator derived from foamy viruses (FVs) have been included in the BD2111 vector while maintaining high titers and showing an efficient enhancer-blocking function.[34]

### Attempts to improve viral titers

Much effort has been put into attempting to decrease the size of vectors in attempt to improve viral titers. Most vectors use only a minimal promoter of 300–600 bps and varying lengths of the hypersensitive sites 2–4 of the LCR (2.0–3.2 kb). Miccio et al, demonstrated that higher titers can be achieve via the omission of the HS4 site (GLOBE and GLOBE-1 vectors)[30]. A similar approach was also demonstrated by Williams et al during development of the BCH-BB694 vector[44]

The woodchuck hepatitis virus posttranscriptional regulator element (WPRE) sequence has been used in many lentiviral vectors to improve viral titers and gene expression by increasing RNA stability, improving RNA processing and facilitating RNA export[62]. Given that WPRE is capable of enhancing gene expression, there is a theoretical risk that this could potentially lead to activation of neighboring genes as well leading to an increased leukemogenesis risk however there is no evidence for this as of now. Nonetheless, although it is typically included just before the 3’ end (Lenti/G-βAS3-FB, BD211), Rivella et al discovered a novel method of instead including the WPRE sequence directly after the 3’ end such that WPRE is included in transcribed RNA in producing cell lines in order to preserve high titers by maximizing the amount retrotranscribed sequence but since it is outside of the LTRs it is not included in proviral rna genome and thus does not integrate into the host genome allowing for a theoretically better safety profile while still maintaining high titers.[35]

Although utilization of reverse oriented vector prevents splicing and thus ensures inclusion of intron 2 which is essential for adequate gene expression, reverse orientation of vectors results in lower titers and gene expression. Thus, our lab has developed an alternative method of ensuring prevention of loss of intron 2 while still utilizing a forward oriented vector. This is achieved by a RRE selection whereby RRE, which is necessary for vector packaging is actually moved to being contained within intron 2. This ensures that any splicing out of intron 2 that occurs during vector production in lentiviral producing cells does not get packaged but normal splicing can still occur following vector integration into target cells. This method resulted in sixfold higher vector titers and four to tenfold higher transduction efficiency[45]. Although this vector has not yet been used in clinical trials, it warrants mentioning because it marks a promising development potentially allowing for significantly improved vector production efficiencies.

### Genome editing used in clinical trials for Sickle Cell Disease & β-Thalassemia

Although lentiviral gene insertion strategies have proven to be effective in reversing the SCD and thalassemia phenotypes, they do not directly silence the production of hemoglobin S (HbS) and there is integration of foreign DNA which allows for possibility of insertional mutagenesis. The advent of CRISPR-Cas9 technology, first introduced by Doudna and Charpentier in 2012, has revolutionized gene therapy.[63] This breakthrough earned them the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2020 and has allowed for precise genetic correction without the need for viral vectors.

CRISPR-Cas9 works by inducing double-strand breaks (DSBs) in DNA, which can be repaired by one of two main pathways: homology-directed repair (HDR) or non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). HDR uses a homologous DNA sequence as a template to accurately repair the break. In nature, this means using the sister chromatid as the template for repair, but for the purposes of gene therapy, a donor DNA can be introduced to serve as the repair template. This makes HDR ideal for precise gene correction, such as converting the HbS mutation to wild-type hemoglobin A (HbA). However, HDR is restricted to the G2 and S phases of the cell cycle and does not readily occur in non-dividing cells like hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Additionally, delivering the donor DNA template required for HDR can be toxic to HSCs, further complicating its application. NHEJ, on the other hand, is the repair mechanism of choice utilized by quiescent cells. This process rapidly joins the broken DNA ends without needing a template, but it can introduce errors, such as small insertions or deletions (indels), which can disrupt gene function. Thus NHEJ is useful for gene knockout.

Targeted genome editing offers the significant benefit of avoiding the integration of foreign DNA into the patient’s genome, reducing the risk of insertional mutagenesis. It can either directly repair the mutated HbS gene or induce globin switching, allowing for the reactivation of fetal hemoglobin (HbF). One key advantage is that genome editing can leverage the host’s native regulation of gene expression, which could lead to more erythroid-specific globin expression without requiring exogenous regulatory elements.

However, the main drawbacks of using designer nucleases, such as CRISPR/Cas9 or Zinc Finger Nucleases (ZFNs), lies in the challenges of delivering these nucleases into hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). The process of inducing double-strand breaks (DSBs) necessary for gene editing can lead to significant cell toxicity, impairing long-term viability and engraftment potential. There is also concern over off-target effects, which may cause genotoxicity by unintentionally disrupting other genes, possibly resulting in leukemogenesis.

### Gene correction

Given that non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) is the favored mechanism for repairing double-strand breaks (DSBs) in hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), this presents a major challenge for gene correction approaches, which rely on homology-directed repair (HDR). To address such limitations, Dr. Shinya Yamanaka and Sir John Gurdon demonstrated that introducing several key transcription factors could revert fibroblast cells to a pluripotent state, creating what are now known as induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), which can then differentiate into any cell type. This breakthrough, earned Yamanaka and Gurdon the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 2012.

To overcome the low efficiency of HDR in HSCs, one strategy explored in early gene-editing trials involved editing a patient’s iPSCs and subsequently differentiating these corrected iPSCs into hematopoietic stem cells, known as iHSCs. While there is published evidence that iPSCs can differentiate into various mature hematopoietic lineages, no studies have conclusively shown that iPSCs can reliably differentiate into HSCs with long-term engraftment and multipotent capacity. Nonetheless, the HBB HSC-01 product claims to utilize this approach and has been undergoing clinical trials since 2019. No results have been published from this trial and it is not known whether any patients have been enrolled.

The other challenge with HDR is that while electroporation and delivery of RNP itself is toxic to cells, single stranded donor DNA, which has typically been introduced via single-stranded oligo DNA nucleotides (ssODNs), is also toxic to cells. This results in low efficiency of gene correction but also loss of long-term repopulation capacity in HSPCs. To overcome this limitation, Porteus et al, demonstrated that AAV6 vector can be used to safely and efficiently introduce donor template DNA into HSCs without causing excessive toxicity to cells or loss of long term repopulation capacity.[64] This technology was used in clinical trials starting in 2021 using Nulabeglogene autogedtemcel (nula-cel), previously known as GPH101, which uses AAV6 to deliver donor HBB DNA to directly correct HbS to HbA. The first patient to undergo this therapy experienced a long delay before engraftment (resulting in a halt of the trial) and ultimately achieved resolution of her symptoms related to sickle cell disease with improvement of baseline hemoglobin and resolution of VOEs, but had a suprising result of developing markedly high HbF levels (HgbF >78%) 1 year after transplant. This is surprising because unlike some other gene therapy strategies, nula-cell is not intended to increase fetal hemoglobin. The reason for why this increase is seen is still not known and is still being further explored.[65]

Preclinical studies for CRISPR_SCD001 demonstrated that using electroporated ssODN and a high-fidelity Cas9 variant, almost 100% gene editing can be performed on CD34 cells. Within these, 30% have undergone HDR. Although NHEJ is still occurring in the majority of cells, these cells seem to have a thalassemic phenotype and thus do not undergo effective erythroid differentiation allowing for in vivo enrichment of functional red blood cells during erythropoiesis. Thus, the clinical trial with this editing protocol has instituted safety considerations to suspend enrollment in the event that a thalassemia phenotype is generated.[47]

Recent discoveries have shown that Cas9-mediated DNA damage activates the p53-mediated DNA damage response, which can further reduce the efficiency of homology-directed repair (HDR). Studies have demonstrated that using i53 variants, which introduce stabilizing interactions that inhibit 53BP1, or employing DNA-PK inhibitors, can effectively suppress the non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) pathway. These strategies have been shown to enhance HDR editing outcomes in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs), representing a promising advancement for gene correction therapies in SCD.[66]

### Fetal Hemoglobin induction

There are several important repressors of fetal hemoglobin that become active during the switch from fetal to adult hemoglobin that occurs shortly after birth. These repressors block the interaction between the LCR and the HBG1/HBG2 promoters, silencing γ-globin expression and promoting β-globin production.[67] The most important of these repressors is BCL11A, which binds to the HBG promoters and suppresses HbF production. Thus the main methods of re-inducing production of HbF would be to create mutations in the HBG1/HBG2 promoters that disrupt the binding sites for the major repressors such as BCL11A, or to knock down BCL11A expression itself.

### Generation of HPFH mutations (γ-globin gene (HBG1/HBG2) promoters )

The first approach mimics natural mutations found in hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin (HPFH). HPFH mutations are either deletional, where large deletions remove the δ- and β-globin genes leading to (δβ)°-thalassemia, or non-deletional, consisting of point mutations or small indels in the γ-globin promoters. Recreating large deletions using gene-editing technologies such as CRISPR-Cas9 is technically challenging and also have the potential to create a thalassemic phenotype. However, non-deletional HPFH mutations can typically reactivate HbF by eliminating binding sites for repressors like BCL11A, allowing the interaction between the LCR and γ-globin promoters to be restored. Several products currently in clinical trials are based on this approach, including SAGES1, which targets the −115 BCL11A binding site, EDIT-301, which targets the distal CCAAT box region of the γ-globin promoters, and BEAM-101, which uses adenine base editing (ABE) to modify the BCL11A binding site.[54–56] OTQ923, another product in trials, targets the −246 position, a site discovered in an unbiased screen for regulatory elements that repress γ-globin transcription but not classically attributed to being a BCL11A binding site.[51]

### Disruption of BCL11A

The second approach focuses on reducing or knocking down BCL11A expression itself. The identification of BCL11A as a major HbF repressor through genome-wide association studies (GWAS) in 2007–2008 was a major breakthrough in hemoglobin regulation. BCL11A contains an erythroid-specific enhancer that is only active in red blood cells, making it an ideal target for gene therapy, as interventions can be focused on erythroid cells without affecting other tissues.[13] This can be achieved by delivering short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) via lentiviral vectors, which bind to BCL11A mRNA, triggering its degradation and preventing translation, or it by using designer nucleases such as CRISPR-Cas9 to create indel mutations in the gene itself. Lowering BCL11A levels allows for the reactivation of γ-globin genes and subsequent HbF production.[44] Several products targeting BCL11A are currently in clinical trials, including BRL-103, OTQ923, BRL-101, BIVV003/ST-400, and CTX-001, the latter of which was FDA-approved in December 2023.

### Delivery Methods for Gene Editing

The delivery strategy for designer nucleases is an important consideration in gene therapy design, as it significantly influences both the efficiency and safety of the approach. Generally, the Cas9 protein can be delivered to cells via DNA, mRNA, or as the protein itself, with each method offering distinct advantages and disadvantages. Delivery via DNA (such as through plasmids or lentiviral vectors) leads to sustained Cas9 expression, which often results in higher editing frequencies. However, prolonged expression also increases the likelihood of off-target effects, raising safety concerns. By contrast, transient protein expression is the preferred method, as it reduces off-target activity by limiting the duration of Cas9 activity within the cell. [68]

CRISPR-Cas9 has gained widespread popularity due to its versatility enabling the easy design of Cas9 proteins to target virtually any segment of DNA using complementary guide RNA in ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes, other gene-editing platforms remain in use. For example, BIVV003 (for sickle cell disease) and ST-400 (for β-thalassemia) utilize Zinc Finger Nucleases (ZFNs), which are delivered via mRNA electroporation. The products utilizing CRISPR technology in clinical trials are utilizing RNP electroporation.

While transient expression through RNP electroporation reduces off-target effects, the process itself poses challenges. Electroporation can be toxic to hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), leading to reduced cell viability and impairing long-term engraftment potential. This has driven significant interest in developing alternative delivery methods for Cas9, such as lipid nanoparticles or fusing Cas9 with cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs) like TAT, which may reduce toxicity and improve delivery efficiency.[69, 70]

### Gene therapy receives FDA approval in SCD

Recently, the FDA has approved therapies within both categories of gene therapy, gene addition and gene editing. LYFGENIA (lovotibeglogene autotemcel) is a gene addition therapy, in which patient CD34 cells are transduced with the lentiviral vector BB305. Treatment results for lyfgenia demonstrated that 94% of patients achieved complete elimination of severe vaso-occlusive events (VOEs), with 88% experiencing complete resolution of all VOEs. 86% of patients achieved sustained globin response, defined as transfusion independence with a hemoglobin >3 g/dL greater than baseline or ≥ 10 g/dL. Moreover, 100% of patients with a history of stroke achieved transfusion-independence and without stroke recurrence for the duration of the study (44–60 months). The therapy also resulted in sustained hemoglobin levels of 11 g/dL or more, with the therapeutic hemoglobin HbAT87Q accounting for 40% of total hemoglobin. In addition, all patients achieved transfusion independence, with HbAT87Q being expressed in a mean of 85% of red cells.[28] The second approach, gene editing, is exemplified by Casgevy (exagamglogene autotemcel) in which patient CD34 cells are edited using CTX-001 which uses CRISPR-Cas9 technology to knock down BCL11a. The first patient experienced a rise in baseline hemoglobin from 7.2 g/dL to 12 g/dL after 15 months. HbF levels increased from 9.1% to 43.2%, and was expressed in nearly 100% of red blood cells.[50] Interim results from 31 patients in this study showed that 93.5% of patients had complete remission of VOEs for at least 12 consecutive months, and of the patients who did experience VOE, none required hospitalization.[71] The FDA approval of these therapies is a promising milestone for the field, providing hope for continued advancements and future developments in gene therapy for SCD.

### Cost:

Current gene therapy approaches require the collection of mobilized autologous CD34+ cells via apheresis, followed by ex vivo gene manipulation. After myeloablative conditioning, the genetically modified stem cells are infused back into the patient. This process leads to a period of several weeks of profound cytopenias, during which patients require frequent transfusion support and are at high risk of opportunistic infections. As a result, prolonged hospital admissions at specialized transplant centers are necessary.

The costs associated with gene therapy are staggering. Recently approved therapies like Lyfgenia and Casgevy are priced at $3.1 million and $2.2 million respectively in the United States.[72] These prices reflect only the direct cost of the gene therapy products themselves, with additional expenses from treatment-related hospitalizations and supportive care driving the overall cost even higher. This creates significant ethical and practical challenges, particularly since 90% of the global population of patients with sickle cell disease (SCD) reside in sub-Saharan Africa, where access to such therapies is limited or non-existent.

The high cost of gene therapy is one of the greatest challenges in the field, with hope of being mitigated through advancements in vector production efficiency. For example, using a forward-oriented vector that includes intron 2 can improve production efficiency without sacrificing efficacy.[45] Another limiting factor in production efficiency is nonspecific cell transduction during vector manufacturing. Current methods rely on CD34+ cell selection, but many of these progenitor cells lack long-term engraftment potential, reducing the overall efficiency of generating therapeutic cells. Kiem et al. demonstrated that a double-selection process using both CD34+ and CD90+ markers could reduce non-target cells by 30-fold while maintaining engraftment potential in vivo.[73]

An additional strategy of utmost importance, is to explore alternative pseudotyping strategies. Currently, all lentiviral vectors use the VSVG envelope pseudotype, which lacks specificity and can transduce all cell types, including non-engrafting cells. Recent data suggest that using alternative envelopes, such as the measles envelope, may result in improved tropism, favoring the transduction of cells with long-term engraftment potential.

### Need for myeloablation:

Currently, to “make space” for the reconstitution of genetically modified stem cells, patients undergo myeloablation, which involves destroying the bone marrow using genotoxic agents like busulfan. While effective, this approach carries significant risks, including the development of secondary malignancies and other complications like infertility, along with causing profound and prolonged cytopenias until engraftment occurs. Recent advancements in antibody-based conditioning aim to reduce side effects such as genotoxicity and infertility. Although promising, this method still results in significant cytopenias. [74]

One promising solution to eliminate the need for myeloablative conditioning is the development of an in vivo delivery vehicle capable of specifically targeting hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Current lentiviral vectors utilize the VSVG envelope, which targets the ubiquitous LDL receptor, leading to a broad tropism that allows infection of various cell types. Additionally, VSVG is highly immunogenic and is rapidly inactivated by human serum complement proteins. Thus, it is essential to explore alternatives to the VSVG envelope pseudotype for lentiviral vectors, focusing on envelopes with more selective tropism and reduced immunogenicity.

Alternative pseudotyping strategies have shown potential for improving specificity and efficiency in gene therapy. For example, the Measles envelope has demonstrated promise in selectively targeting HSCs.[75] Additionally, the Cocal envelope, which has similar tropism to VSVG, has been shown to resist complement inactivation.[76] By modifying the Cocal envelope’s natural tropism with single-chain variable fragment (scFv) antibodies, such as CD117 or CD90, specificity for HSCs with long-term engraftment potential can be further enhanced.[77] These innovations offer the potential to increase the efficiency of gene therapy and holds promise for bypassing the need for toxic conditioning regimens.

Another possibility is to move away from lentiviral vectors altogether. Lipid nanoparticle (LNP) technology has rapidly advanced in recent years, as seen in the development of mRNA vaccines for SARS-CoV-2, an achievement that earned Katalin Karikó and Drew Weissman the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 2023. By anchoring targeting ligands to LNPs, it becomes possible to deliver genetic material, such as RNA, directly to specific cell types while evading the host’s immune system. For example, using CD117 antibodies as targeting ligands may enable the selective targeting of LNPs to HSCs.[78]

### In vivo selection of genetically modified stem cells

As mentioned earlier, genetically modified red blood cells (RBCs) naturally have a survival advantage over sickle RBCs due to the anti-sickling effect, resulting in longer survival. However, it is estimated that at least a 20% level of genetically modified stem cells would be required to achieve a cure for sickle cell disease. To enhance the engraftment and survival of genetically modified stem cells, applying additional selection pressure could be beneficial. However, providing too much of a survival advantage, such as through the activation of oncogenes that lead to clonal expansion, could result in leukemogenesis, which is a significant risk.

A safer approach would be to design bicistronic vectors that co-express a therapeutic globin gene alongside another gene that provides a controlled survival advantage. The CAL-H (CSL200) vector was an example of this strategy, co-expressing a short-hairpin RNA (sh-734) targeting the HPRT gene. HPRT knockdown conferred resistance to 6-thioguanine (6TG), allowing for in vivo enrichment of genetically modified stem cells following 6TG administration.[43] However, the CAL-H vector trial was terminated due to unanticipated delays, not for safety reasons. Our lab has demonstrated the potential to further improve the survival advantage of genetically modified cells by co-expressing a truncated erythropoietin receptor, allowing for erythropoietin-dependent enhanced erythropoiesis of gene-modified cells.[79].

Optimizing the kinetics of cellular expansion has already proven transformative in the field of cellular therapy, particularly with CAR-T cell therapy, and has reshaped our understanding of therapeutic kinetics. While most pharmacological agents require frequent, lifelong dosing due to elimination kinetics, cellular therapies offer the potential for single-dose treatments due to the capacity for in vivo cellular expansion.

### Summary

SCD is an ideal candidate for gene therapy, as correcting the single gene mutation in hematopoietic stem cells offers the potential for a one-time treatment that could provide a lifetime cure. Although SCD was the first disease with a known genetic basis, described in 1956, progress toward a cure has been slowed by various challenges. One of the key advancements in developing curative strategies has been the use of lentiviral vectors, which allow for gene editing of hematopoietic stem cells. While early lentiviral vector strategies faced difficulties, particularly in achieving erythroid-specific overexpression of the therapeutic transgene, these challenges have largely been overcome by the inclusion of the globin locus control region (LCR) in the promoter sequence and the use of reverse-oriented vectors. These innovations have enabled the inclusion of critical enhancer elements within intron 2, ensuring adequate gene expression.

Looking to the future, this is an exciting time for the field, with significant recent advancements in gene editing technologies like CRISPR-Cas9, base editing, improvements in homology-directed repair (HDR), lipid nanoparticle (LNP) delivery, and antibody-based conditioning. In 2023, these breakthroughs culminated in the FDA approval of the first two gene therapies for sickle cell disease, marking the beginning of a new era. This approval not only validates decades of research but also sets a precedent that will hopefully accelerate the development of other gene therapies for SCD and related monogenic disorders. With numerous therapies on the horizon, this milestone will likely pave the way for the development of new therapeutic innovations, and provide encouragement to others seeking to advance the field.. However, the field remains young, with many opportunities for further improvement in terms of cost, accessibility, treatment complexity, efficacy, and safety. The hope is that these recent successes will inspire researchers to continue investigating new ways to improve and refine gene therapies, working toward a future where curative treatments for sickle cell disease become accessible to patients globally.

### Declaration of Generative AI and AI-assisted Technologies in the Writing Process

During the preparation of this work, the author(s) used ChatGPT by OpenAI in order to enhance the readability and structure of the manuscript. After using this tool, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the publication.

## Metadata

- **PMID**: [39729054](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39729054/)
- **PMC**: [PMC12198424](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12198424/)
- **DOI**: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcyt.2024.11.006
- **Journal**: Cytotherapy (Cytotherapy)
- **Authors**: Josiah Ballantine, John F Tisdale
- **MeSH Terms**: Humans, Anemia, Sickle Cell, Genetic Therapy, Gene Editing, Clinical Trials as Topic, Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation, CRISPR-Cas Systems, Genetic Vectors, Animals, beta-Thalassemia
- **Full Text**: ✅ Included below
